# The Understanding Gap
*So much velocity, so little understanding.*

In the worker of the modern era, there is a gap developing between what the worker truly understands and what they are authoring or "shipping". 

In the past, this wasn't there because everything an employee they had to produce themselves. And the production of that required extensive understanding of the topic or material; for every produced output, there were countless hours understanding the underlying system before producing it.

Now, in the modern day, with the help of AI, and more specifically *Agents*, this understanding is no longer required. Applications of AI are quickly evolving from knowledge-based work to *problem-solving* and *reasoning*, a shift that is happening extrmely quickly with seemingly serious consequences how the evolution of work is going to change and evolve for all of us.

## How did we get here?
For the first time ever, technology is at a point now at which it is no longer *only* assisting a human in doing their job; through [Chain of Thought](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903) reasoning and training for long-duration, far-horizon tasks, modern day language models (like Anthropic's **Claude Opus 4.7** or **OpenAI's GPT-5.5**) can actually *problem-solve* and reason through problems, troubleshooting along the way to solve issues and achieve the ultimate goal given to it by the user.

To put it simply: for the first time in history, the output of machines is **intelligence**. Not just information, knowledge, or helping you find what you need online, but genuine intelligence and reasoning through a task to achieve it.

We are still in the very early days of fully realizing this newfound capability. Several industries and sectors have incorporated already:
- **AI Coding Agents** like [Anthropic's Claue Code](), [OpenAI's Codex](), and [Microsoft's GitHub Copilot]() use long-duration reasoning and goal seeking to reason over a task given by the user, use built-in capabilities to take action to achieve this goal (using internal or even external systems), and even troubleshoot and develop novel workarounds when encountering obstacles. Numerous times I've seen newcomers to these tools thoroughly impressed or even *shocked* when seeing how resilient these agents are in applying themselves and achieving almost any goal you give it, no matter how "out there"..
- **Deep Research** capabilities like [OpenAI's Deep Research](), [Microsoft's Researcher Agent](), and [Gemini's Deep Research]() allows AI to go from *answering* questions to *investigating* them. When you delegate, the agents plan an investigation, open 50+ webpages and reads through, and synthetisizes a report, all within minutes; a task a human would normally take days to perform. 
- **Cybersecurity**: Modern AI security agents like [Microsoft Security Copilot](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/copilot/security/microsoft-security-copilot) act as security analysis, that proactively "hunt" for vulnerabilities and security risks by looking for pattern that expose risks and then self-remediate by autonomously isolating machines , revoking credentials, and starting forensic audits.

In all of these examples above, the AI is not just *helping* a human do their work, it is actually doing work *for* the human, autonomously. In years past, this would have seemed impossible due to the highly unstructured, unpredictable nature of the work. But with modern day language models provided in an "agentic" package, humans can truly delegate these tasks, including all of the "thinking" involved in them, to an AI.

## Velocity Pressure
With how much can now be delegated to AI, the maximum output of a human worker is now seemingly multiple times greater than it was in the past. This is an amazing thing. 

I'm sure you have already seen it - seemingly endless amounts of "look what I made with Claude" or "check out the amazing app Codex built me" or "I put this PowerPoint deck together using Cowork". The *velocity* of content creation is seemingly through the roof right now. Content hosting platforms are seeing a velocity of creation like never before, with [GitHub seeing 30x more activity](https://www.mindstudio.ai/blog/github-30x-repos-infrastructure-signals-proactive-agents) as a great example.

With how much can be done with so little effort, there is mounting pressure on those *not* using these tools to keep up with those that *are* using these tools. Particularly in the current economic environment with mass layoffs and increased scrutiny into outputs, each of us are mindful that our output must scale leveraging these tools and not stay stagnant. 

This mounting pressure to *produce* is the root cause of what I am calling "**The Understanding Gap**.

## The Understanding Gap
When you have **increased pressure to produce** and **decreased barrier to entry to producing to near-zero**, the net result is a *decreased level of understanding* of what was produced and how it was produced. In other words, there is a developing divide between *what* is being produce and our *understanding of what was produced*.

Before AI, if you wanted to produce a web app for your users, you would have to learn programming fundamentals, learn front-end development, learn the React framework, learn cloud hosting, *understanding* the process and methods to achieve the goal. After AI, you just prompt an agent and it figures out the rest.

Before AI, if you wanted to deliver a presentation on a newly announced product to a customer, you would have to spend hours combing through announcements, testing the capabilities, brainstorming ways to convey the key messaging, building visuals in a deck, and then refining talking points, *understanding* the new capability, how it works, and its value. With AI, you just prompt an agent to draft a deck with speaker notes and read the script word-for-word.

In both of the examples above, in the "After AI" scenario, the required level of *understanding* of the subject is near-zero. The "figuring out", "reasoning", "brainstorming", and all thought can be fully delegated to the agent, asking only the "cliffnotes" that you need to make the final delivery even giving the *illusion* of understanding to those you deliver to. What you produced, via your agent, becomes a black box that you have little to no understanding of; but boy does it look good!

While this may at first seem like a conccious choice and that staying sharp in any particular domain can still be taken seriously and done, market dynamics beg to differ: what value does *understanding* actually have in a world where your peer competition is outsourcing understanding and producing 5x more output by giving up on the goal of understanding? For every 1 hour you spend trying to undertand an underlying process, your competitors are spending delegating to an agent and producing because of it.

## Risks of The Understanding Gap
I feel there are both risks to us as humanity as a whole and risks to the individual when leaning too heavily into delegating understanding to AI. I'll cover the individual-focused risks here.

**The short-term risk: "getting lost deep in the forest"**. Imagine you wanted to wander deep into a forest to experience something amazing at the center. You are unfamiliar with forest navigation so you hire a guide to bring you deep in. The guide handles the difficult parts for you, leading you to the center: cutting branches, making paths, navigating with a compass/map. Upon getting to the center, they trip, hit their head, and become unconcious, completely incapacited. How will you navigate out? Without any level of understanding of forest navigation, you are stuck!

Because AI presents the illusion of the capability of diving deep into a domain that the user has little familairty with, we will jump into action with AI and go head first into a given topic or subject or domain using the AI *heavily* as our crutch. In the same way you can get trapped un the forest if your guide becomes incapacitated, you can be in serious trouble if your AI begins struggling deep into a project's lifecycle, leaving you with no way out. It is a good idea to have at least some familiarity/understanding of the domain you are working in!

**The long-term risk: **"puppet to the machine"**. If we rely too heavily on AI to do *everything* from us, not just to *produce*, but even to *think*, *reason*, and make decisions, at what point do we become nothing more than a human puppet to an artificial intelligence? I'll be the first to admit that AI is *very* intelligent and can provide amazing value in deferring much to it - but deferring *too* much blindly will lead to problems. 

The more and more we defer, unquestioning, the more our critical thinking skills can become compromised. And if we are only a "puppet to the machine", what value do we uniquely provide that cannot be easily reproduced from the model itself, or another human puppet of the model? The value of what you provide will drop to zero, quickly degraded by the commodized nature of what you are providing.

## Staying Relevant
Today, every hard worker is constantly searching for ways to remain relevant and employable in today's economy. I don't have any certain answers, but I'll share my early thoughts while we are only on the doorstep of what is to come:

**Tip #1: Find the right Ownership/Delegation Balance**: In using these AI agent tools, we have the very difficult choice to make of how much effort we spend in understanding *what* the AI Agent is doing and *how* it is doing it. At first glance, this may seem a fool's errand; why concern yourself at all about the underlying mechanisms the AI using if the AI will always be there to solve them? This is a falacy. Project Managers (PMs) are common roles in the tech industry, responsible for managing the output of developers and applying their efforts to the right problems. The *best* PMs are the ones that strive to understand the developers work and then use this understanding to choose the best path forward for the partnership as a whole. The same principle applies to you as a user of these AI agents; having some level of understanding of the process is helpful, but knowing exactly **what level of understanding** is perfect allows you to strike the perfect understanding/investment ratio.

**Tip #2: Choosing what to understand**: no leader will tell you they can do a better job of each of the people working under them. Their role, as a leader, is finding the right people for each job and removing obstacles to allow them to do their best work. Naturally, their *understanding* of each domain is being *outsourced* to someone else, allowing the leader to spread there focus elsewhere. THat is the role of delegation and it is a wonderful thing. However, sometimes leaders must become deeply understanding of a particular topic or domain, with thier understanding later becoming critical to them making the *right decisions* on where to delegate their teams energy. The decision of **what** to invest your time learning and understanding is going to be a critical question that we answer in the future, especially with how much we can delegate to AI and get away with (procrastinate/postpone).

**Tip #3: Quickly Understanding**: With how much we can now delegate to AI Agents, pressure will likely ramp up on the individual worker *not* being an isolated "specialist" of a particular single domain, task, business process, etc. Instead, each of us will be expected to do more with these tools, not only outputting more but outputting across a variety of connected disciplines. Being a *quick, adaptable learner* is going to become a very valuable skill in the modern era - again, not necessarily learning it all at a deep level at a domain, but enough to be "dangerous", i.e. direct your agent exactly as necessarily to achieve the optimal outcome!